--
docname: draft-codec-agnostic-rtp-payload-format-00
title: Codec agnostic RTP payload format for video
category: std
ipr: trust200902
area: ART
workgroup: AVTCORE
stand_alone: yes

pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs]

author:
-
  ins: S. Garcia Murillo
  name: Sergio Garcia Murillo
  org: CoSMo
  email: sergio.garcia.murillo@cosmosoftware.io

-
  ins: Y. Fablet
  name: Youenn Fablet
  org: Apple Inc.
  email: youenn@apple.com 
  
-
  ins: A. Gouaillard
  name: Alex Gouaillard
  org: CoSMo
  email: alex.gouaillard@cosmosoftware.io



normative:
  RFC2119:
  RFC3550:
  RFC3711:
  RFC4566:
  RFC7656:
  RFC8285:

informative:
  RFC6464:
  RFC6465:
  RFC6904:
  SFrame:

--- abstract



--- middle

Introduction
============

The objective of this spec is to create a generic RTP packetization format that can be used with any video codec or encrypted content and that allows SFUs to perform layer selection without requiring access to the codec payload.

Media packetization and depacketization
=======================

As per {{RFC7656}} the generic packetizer will define a Media Packetizer that transforms a single Encoded Stream into one or several RTP packets.
These RTP packets are sent over the wire to a Media Depacketizer that will reconstruct the Encoded Stream.
 
  
 ```
                Physical Stimulus
                      |
                      V
           +----------------------+
           |     Media Capture    |
           +----------------------+
                      |
                 Raw Stream
                      V
           +----------------------+
           |     Media Source     |<- Synchronization Timing
           +----------------------+
                      |
                Source Stream
                      V
           +----------------------+
           |    Media Encoder     |
           +----------------------+
                      |
                Encoded Stream 
                      V
           +----------------------+
           |    Media Encryptor   |
           +----------------------+
                      |
                Encrypted Stream    +------------+
                      V             |            V
           +----------------------+ | +----------------------+
           |   Media Packetizer   | | | RTP-Based Redundancy |
           +----------------------+ | +----------------------+
                      |             |            |
                      +-------------+  Redundancy RTP Stream
               Source RTP Stream                 |
                      V                          V
           +----------------------+   +----------------------+
           |  RTP-Based Security  |   |  RTP-Based Security  |
           +----------------------+   +----------------------+
                      |                          |
              Secured RTP Stream   Secured Redundancy RTP Stream
                      V                          V
           +----------------------+   +----------------------+
           |   Media Transport    |   |   Media Transport    |
           +----------------------+   +----------------------+

             Figure 1: Sender Side Concepts in the Media Chain with Application-level Media Encryption 
             
```
 
This generic packetization does not change how the mapping between one or several encoded or dependant streams are mapped to the RTP streams or how the synchronization sources(s) (SSRC) are assigned. 

The generic packetizer only supports Single RTP stream on a Single media Transport (SRST) when Scalale Video Coding (SVC) is in use.

The other elements on the Media Chain, like RTP-Based Redundancy, are not affected by the usage of the generic packetizer. 

 
RTP packetization
=======================

A generic packetizer, by design, is not expected to understand the format of the media to transmit.
The unit used by the packetizer to do processing is called a frame in the remainder of the document.

It is the responsibility of the application using the packetizer to group media content in meaningful frames.
In the common case of a video codec, the packetizer frame is the frame in byte format (h264 annex b for example) generated by the encoder.
The packetizer can fragment, in a content-agnostic way, the frame in multiple RTP packets to ensure packets do not exceed the network maximum transmission unit.

In the case of a video codec supporting spatial scalability, each spatial layer is split in its own frame.
The spatial layers are sent in ascending order, with the same RTP timestamp, and only the last RTP packet of the last spatial layer frame will have the marker bit set to 1.

If the application wants to encrypt content, the application will split media content into frames before encryption.
Each frame will be encrypted independently, using {{SFrame}} for instance, and transmitted by the packetizer.

Layer selection
=======================

SFUs need to have a basic understanding of each frame they receive so they can decide to forward it or not and to which endpoint.
They might need similar information to support media content recording.
This information is either generic to a group of frame (called a stream hereafter) or specific to each frame.

The information is transmitted as a RTP header extension as the RTP packet payload should be treated as opaque by the SFU.
This is especially necessary if the payload is end-to-end encrypted.
The amount of information should be limited to what is strictly necessary to the SFU task since it is not always as trusted as individual peers.

For audio, configuration information such as Opus TOC might be useful.
For video, the following configuration information might include:
- Stream configuration information: resolution, quality, frame rate...
- Codec specific configuration information: codec profile like profile_idc...
- Frame specific information: whether the stream is decodable when starting from this frame, whether the frame is skippable...

For video content, this information can be sent using a Dependency Descriptor header extension.
In that case, the first RTP packet of the frame will have its start_of_frame equal to 1 and the last packet will have its end_of_frame equal to 1.

SDP negotiation
=======================

A payload type format and the payload type codec and the associated payload type header extension MUST be negotiated in the SDP O/A for each media type in order to be able to use the RTP generic packetization. Only the payload types negotiated are allowed to be used as associated payload types.

RTX and FEC procedures applies normally.

```
m=video 9 UDP/TLS/RTP/SAVPF 96 97 98 99 100 101
c=IN IP4 0.0.0.0
a=rtcp:9 IN IP4 0.0.0.0
a=setup:actpass
a=mid:1
a=extmap:1 urn:ietf:params:rtp-hdrext:sdes:mid
a=extmap:2 urn:ietf:params:rtp-hdrext:sdes:rtp-stream-id
a=extmap:3 urn:ietf:params:rtp-hdrext:sdes:repaired-rtp-stream-id
a=extmap:4 urn:ietf:params:rtp-hdrext:associated-payload-type
a=sendrecv
a=rtpmap:96 vp9/90000
a=rtpmap:97 vp8/90000
a=rtpmap:98 generic/90000
a=rtpmap:99 rtx/90000
a=fmtp:99 apt=96
a=rtpmap:100 rtx/90000
a=fmtp:100 apt=97
a=rtpmap:101 rtx/90000
a=fmtp:101 apt=98
```

Q: What frequency should we use for audio? One per the different frequencies of each audio codec?

Security Considerations
=======================

IANA Considerations
===================

Two new media subtypes have been registered with IANA, as described in this section.  This registration is done using the registration template {{REF}} and following [[RFC3555]].

## Registration of audio/generic

   Type name: audio

   Subtype name: generic

   Required parameters: none

   Optional parameters: none

   Encoding considerations: This format is framed (see Section 4.8 in the template document [3]) and contains binary data.

   Security considerations: TBD.

   Interoperability considerations: TBD

   Published specification: TBD.

   Applications that use this media type: TBD.
   
   Additional information: none

   Intended usage: COMMON

   Restrictions on usage: TBD

   Author:

   Change controller:
      
# Registration of video/generic

   Type name: video

   Subtype name: generic

   Required parameters: none

   Optional parameters: none

   Encoding considerations: This format is framed (see Section 4.8 in the template document [3]) and contains binary data.

   Security considerations: TBD.

   Interoperability considerations: TBD

   Published specification: TBD.

   Applications that use this media type: TBD.
   
   Additional information: none

   Intended usage: COMMON

   Restrictions on usage: TBD

   Author:

   Change controller:


--- back
